>> Richard Feldman: All right, so
we are on part six out of seven,
we're in the home stretch.
So this is gonna be the last time
that we do this on typecheck.js,
the next one's gonna be on wasm.js.
All right, so here we are,
typecheck.js, scrolling down.
And now at this point, right,
we're closer to the bottom here.
I think that's where all the things
are clustered, yeah, they are.
Okay, great, right.
So here's what we're doing here.
We are now actually doing some
type checking on an array.
So this is our first polymorphic type
checking that we've done in an exercise.
So array types,
they have one type parameter.
If the array is empty, then this
is actually very straightforward,
like when we visited it's, well,
if it's an empty array then no problem.
There's definitely nothing to infer about
the element type, it's definitely gonna be
unbound, and so you can just early
return and just do that fun.
Create concrete type array, which is going
to end up with an array that has null for
its type parameter.
So that part, pretty straight forward,
but the more interesting part, of course,
is when you actually do
have elements in there.
Now, the cool thing about arrays is that,
some languages have what are called
heterogeneous arrays, where you can have
a mix of different types of the arrays,
you can get a string and
a number, and this and that.
Lots of other languages including
this one, require homogeneous arrays,
where you're allowed to have as many
different elements as you want, but
they all have to be the same type.
Or, to be more precise about it,
all of their types have to unify.
We're not really gonna get into
the implications of that quite right here.
But something that does
fall out of this is that,
you can have an array of arrays, and
some of those arrays are more strict or
permissive in terms of what
their type parameter is.
Cuz you don't have to just have
a type parameters and all or nothing,
it's not just a concrete type string or
a null,
it could also be another array type, for
example, you have an array of arrays.
And as you nest these, just the fact that
they're all getting unified together means
that you can end up with different
arrays getting restricted more and
more as they get used in.
And sort of, you end up with sort
of the lowest common denominator of
flexibility as all of those
get unified together.
So, basically, what we're gonna do is we
need to ensure that every single element
in the array has the same type.
And we're gonna do this in pretty
much the most basic way there is,
which is just to march down all the
elements, [LAUGH] and just be like, okay,
you all gotta be the same.
There is one thing we do have going for
us, though, which is,
the nice thing about the whole unification
system is that, it means that,
if the if we knew that they're all
going to get unified together,
we don't need to do the matrix
of all possibilities.
What we can do instead is we can just say,
okay, just grab the first element out of
there, and just everybody else
needs to be equal to that.
So that's exactly what we're gonna do,
we're gonna unify every single element in
the array with the first element
in the array, and then just say,
whatever that thing's type is,
that's what everybody else's type is.
And as soon as we encounter
somebody that's a mismatch,
it's a mismatch game over.
But otherwise,
all the symlinks will end up with,
just everything is essentially
equivalent to everything else, and
we don't really need to do
any other work for that.
Okay, so that's what the purpose
of this first element type is.
Note that we'll be handy later is we're
doing the visitNode to get the actual type
out of this and
all the right implications for that.
So this is just the first
element of the array, and
we already handled the case where
the elements list was empty.
So we know that we already
have at least one here.
So this is definitely gonna
end up with something.
Then, we have this first element concrete,
which is our,
the thing that we used in a previous
exercise just to be like,
a convenience like this
will either return null or
else it will return the thing that's
inside the concrete field of that record.
So it's sort of unwrapping it or
just giving you back a null.
And then, we're doing
node.elements.slice1, which is basically
just skip the first one, cuz we
already got the first one over here.
And this is the part where we start to
get into the stuff we're gonna change.
So basically, the procedure for
unifying these all with one another, this
is gonna be our our first from-scratch
unification of polymorphic types.
Get the element's type ID and then
basically get concrete type name just like
we did there, in order to just pull out
the concrete type if there is one or
it might end up being null.
And then we need to check for
type mismatch.
So if it has a concrete type, in other
words, if this is non-null, and so
does the first element, and those
are different, then type mismatch, but
all of those conditions have to be met.
Otherwise, it's okay,
and we let it through.
If that's not the case, sorry,
if we didn't have a type mismatch,
then basically we just
wanna unify the two.
So first we check to see if there's
a type mismatch, and then afterwards,
then if there was not a type mismatch,
then we go ahead and unify.
Great, let's take five minutes and
work through it.
>> Richard Feldman: All right, so
this initial case, not a problem,
we're already done with that.
Nothing to do there,
getting the first element type and
the first element concrete,
also not a problem.
The interesting part is
in the body of the loop.
So in the body of the loop, we're gonna
go through this and basically say, okay,
go ahead and
first we get the element type.
So this is actually basically
a carbon copy of what we did up here.
The only difference is
that we're actually,
I forgot that I refactored that.
So basically, just go visit that node,
instead of visiting the first node,
we're just going to do
what we did over there.
And then once you've got the element type,
you can use that to get the element
concrete type, I don't need that anymore.
Yeah, there's a funny example
of JavaScript, or guess,
TypeScript telling that rule that
we talked about earlier, right?
Now we know how to implement
this if you want, right?
This is whether you search the entire
scope and say, disallow duplicates
based on the entire scope, or based on
current scope only or allow it, right?
So here we're seeing,
they are not allowing it in this case, but
now we know how to do all
three if we want, from part 2.
Okay, so there's that one,
and then basically,
here we have this conditional I mentioned,
all of these conditions have to be true
in order for us to report the error.
So, the first element
needs to be concrete and
the second element needs to be concrete.
The first element concrete needs to
not be null is what I should say, so
this is the nullability check and the same
thing there, and then basically just,
yeah, are these actually
not equal to one another.
So if they are both concrete and
they are not equal to each other,
then we have the classic type is
matched scenario, both are concrete,
they're not the same, therefore,
we report an error, so do that.
And then afterwards, if we, yeah,
that's a little bit annoying
to break out before each loop.
So return will actually do what we want,
I guess that's a good argument for
not refactoring this the way I did,
but whatever.
Point being, we're doing the reporting,
that's the critical thing here.
And then basically after that,
we can then try to unify the rating one.
So this is where we essentially say,
okay, the first element type needs to be
the same as every single one
of the other element types.
So all we have to do is essentially say,
since that's sort of
fixed outside the loop,
we're in the middle of the loop, take this
element type and just unify it with that.
And then, this once again, did
the refactor there, elements, or, sorry,
element, and
now we have unified these two.
And unify does actually return
a Boolean as to whether or
not the unification was successful.
If they didn't actually unify,
then, okay, type mismatch,
right here, another one, and there we go.
So now we rerun it, is not defined
a missed one, yeah, that one.
>> Richard Feldman: It just looks nicer
without the old school for loop style.
Although, shout out to the C
course that we did the other day.
[LAUGH] Definitely do some old school for
loops in that.
All right, any questions about arrays,
polymorphism?
Last call for types of questions.
Actually no, you can ask some of the next
section if you want, but we're after this,
we're moving on to WebAssembly.
So now is the best time, I guess, to ask
any type related questions that you got.
>> Speaker 2: I forget the name of
the type system we're using, but
in languages like C and stuff,
that's a different type system, and
I'm assuming the type annotations there
are necessary versus the one we're using?
>> Richard Feldman: In a lot of cases,
yeah.
So quite a lot of languages have either
no or very minimal type inference,
and so they rely very
heavily on type annotations.
Honestly, they look very
different than this,
they'll still have the same basic
concepts of types and how they relate.
And of course, they find type mismatches
too, but the way that they're going about
updating their database is different
in many ways, from what we're doing.
So I would say there's some overlap at
a foundational level, at a basics level.
But yeah, if you get into the details,
you're gonna find quite a lot
different between a C-type system, for
example, and Henley Milner,
who's [LAUGH] the one we're doing.
>> Speaker 2: Do you know what a system
that TypeScript is built off of?
>> Richard Feldman: I mean, TypeScript
is a beast, I mean, it's a really,
it's among languages that are top 10,
top 20, most popular languages,
I would say TypeScript is almost certainly
the most complicated type system there.
The only other contender would be C++, and
I'm not actually sure if C++ type system
is more complicated or if C++ lets you
make a bigger mess in this type system.
>> [LAUGH]
>> Richard Feldman: But
those would be the two top contenders,
[LAUGH] really.
So, yeah, I don't know what they're using,
but it's doesn't fit neatly into
a bucket because it's so complicated, yeah
>> Speaker 3: Why do you think TypeScript
doesn't have function
parameter type inference?
>> Richard Feldman: Why do I think,
first of all,
I didn't know that I don't use
TypeScript much [LAUGH] so
this is news to me that TypeScript doesn't
have function parameter type inference.
I don't know offhand.
I mean, it's actually pretty common for a
lot of languages that they will say things
like, if you're doing it for like an
inline function, like an anonymous lambda
or something like that,
we'll do type inference on the arguments.
But if it's at the top level,
you have to spell out every single type,
there's no type inference whatsoever.
Obviously, that's not true of
what we're doing here, but
I think that hoisting might
be one of the reasons.
So that is an example of a case where a
top level function is just sort of special
and it works differently,
in the case of hoisting,
it's working differently from
a name resolution perspective.
But I wouldn't be surprised if,
in those languages,
if you really dig under the surface.
You can find multiple differences, and not
just the like name resolution between what
it means if you have a top-level function
versus if you have an anonymous lambda.
And some of those languages may not
even support anonymous Lambdas.
So I guess, I don't know, and I don't
really have a particular guess other
than just the general, there's multiple
reasons that many languages don't
allow type inference for
top-level functions.
>> Speaker 3: In functional languages like
Elixir, is there something like unify, but
not for types, but for
values like pattern matching?
>> Richard Feldman: So the way that
pattern matching works is, I would say,
pretty unrelated to type unification.
You basically build up this big matrix and
then, yeah, it's just kind
of its own thing, I wouldn't put
those in the same group, really.
>> Speaker 4: What happens to type
inference when you partially apply
a function?
>> Richard Feldman: What happens to
type inference when you partially apply
a function?
So a piece of trivia, I guess,
about most of these languages is that,
more of them than not are curried, meaning
that they're partially applying non-stop.
So the way that it works in those
languages, so the way that we have
functions working is, I think arrow
function was how I solved this, yeah.
See if you say arrow function, now you
have something to grep for that's not
function which has a million matches it,
I guess I could also use the outline.
Yeah, there it is.
Okay, so in our case,
we have multiple params here, right?
But if you look at the type checker for
like Elm or Haskell or ML, or
something like that, actually rock is
not curried, but all the other ones are,
rock is very unusual in not being curried.
What the language being curried means
is that, technically, in Elm and
Haskell, technically,
every language they have has exactly
one parameter, always, one argument.
But syntactically, they disguise that
fact by basically making it so that both
the syntax for declaring a function looks
like you're defining multiple arguments.
And then also the syntax for
calling a function looks like
you're passing multiple arguments.
And the only time
the distinction comes up,
is if you omit an argument when
you're calling the function.
And in most languages,
that's where the compiler says, hey,
you forgot one, that's error.
But in those languages, says, that's fine,
I'm just gonna return a partially applied
function that has applied all
the arguments you did provide, and
then just says, a lambda,
basically that takes the final argument.
And then if you provide that to the thing
that it's returning, then it goes back and
runs the whole thing, without going
on a huge tangent about currying.
So what does that mean for type inference?
What that basically means is that,
as long as you've got a language
that's already set up to have
all the functions be curried,
it's actually an easier
job than what we're doing.
Because basically you're just,
instead of having to iterate over
here you're just, cool, node.param.
It's the one param I just get rid of,
I just delete some for loops,
basically [LAUGH].
And then there you go, you already have
the partial application and all that.
Where partial application becomes more
of a pain for a compiler author is
actually in the step we're about to
get to, which is code generation.
If you do the naive code generation and
you just actually, literally create all
those lambdas every single time,
that's tends to be bad for performance.
And overcoming that and making it so that
you sort of undo the querying in the very,
very common case where you're
not partially applying it and
applying everything is more work for
the compiler author.
So that's the trade off,
really from a type perspective,
it's actually more convenient to curry
everything and partially apply everything.
And if you're partially applying manually
where you're just like, I'm just like
returning a lambda that I wrote that is
calling this other one with arguments,
that doesn't even need
any special handling.
It's just plain old ordinary function
calling and type unification.
So, that would already work using
everything we've already done here,
we don't even need to lift
a finger [LAUGH] and support that.